Add 'How to build a catalog connector' content (#81)
elyra-ai/examples: component-catalog-connectors/build-a-custom-connector.md

## How to build a component catalog connector

### Catalog connector overview

Catalog connectors provide access to local or remote catalogs that store pipeline component definitions. 

![Component catalogs](doc/images/component-catalogs.png)

The Elyra examples repository includes two types of catalog connectors:
 - Connectors for server-based or service-based catalogs: These types of connectors use an API to communicate with local or remote catalogs. 

   ![server-based catalog connector](doc/images/server-based-catalog-connector.png)

   An example of such a connector is the [Machine Learning Exchange (MLX)](mlx-connector/) connector. This connector uses the MLX API to query the catalog and to retrieve the components that this catalog makes available.

 - Connectors with a built-in catalog: These connectors include a built-in static catalog, eliminating the need for network connectivity once they are installed. This makes them suitable for air gapped environments, but also rather inflexible because a catalog content refresh requires a connector rebuild.

   ![package-based catalog connector](doc/images/package-based-catalog-connector.png)

>    The [Apache Airflow component examples connector](airflow-example-components-connector/) and the [Kubeflow Pipelines component examples connector](kfp-example-components-connector/) are two examples. They make a static set of components available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The [Apache Airflow component examples connector](airflow-example-components-connector/) and the [Kubeflow Pipelines component examples connector](kfp-example-components-connector/) are two examples. Each connector provides a static set components for each respective runtime.
```

1. Install Elyra version 3.3 or later from PyPI or source.
1. Clone or fork the [Elyra examples repository](https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples).
1. Change into the `component-catalog-connectors/connector-template` directory. The directory contains a fully functional connector implementation that can be customized to meet your needs.
1. Verify that the quickstart template connector works as expected by completing the [installation and usage instructions in the README](/component-catalog-connectors/connector-template/README.md).

### Create a catalog connector schema

All catalog connectors have in common that they use a schema to define their internal and public properties. The public properties are exposed to the user in the catalog connector configuration, as shown for the quickstart template connector below:

![Quickstart catalog connector configuration](doc/images/quickstart-catalog-configuration.png)

The common public properties are:
 - "learn more" link, providing access to to connector documentation
 - catalog instance name
 - catalog instance description
 - runtime type filter, which governs the kind of components the connector makes available

>  - component categories, which group the components in the pipeline editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - component categories, which group the components together in the pipeline editor
```

> Connector schemas can optionally also include custom public properties. For illustrative purposes the quickstart template connector defines a required custom property and an optional custom  property. Required properties are typically used to collect catalog connectivity information, such as a server URL, or API token. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connector schemas can optionally also include custom public properties. For illustrative purposes, the quickstart template connector defines a required custom property and an optional custom property. Required properties are typically used to collect catalog connectivity information, such as a server URL, or API token. 
```

#### Customize the schema

The quickstart connector default schema file `TODO-catalog.json` is located in the [`todo_catalog_connector`](/component-catalog-connectors/connector-template/todo_catalog_connector/) directory.
1. Rename the file to reflect your catalog type.

> 1. Using an IDE of your choice, find and replace all occurrences of '`TODO-catalog.json`' in all files in the `component-catalog-connectors/connector-template` directory. (There should be seven.)

Reviewer 2: I think there are only 3 occurrences of `TODO-catalog.json` in `component-catalog-connectors/connector-template`

Author: let me change that to several (:

1. Open the renamed `TODO-catalog.json` schema file in an editor.
1. To avoid breaking the connector, do not: 
     - Remove existing properties, unless indicated otherwise in the comments
     - Change existing property names, unless indicated otherwise in the comments
     - Change existing property values, unless indicated otherwise in the comments
1. Customize the following common catalog connector schema properties:

>    - `$ID`: replace the URL with a valid URL for the renamed schema file.

Reviewer 2: NIT: this is lowercase (`$id`) in the schema file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `$id`: replace the URL with a valid URL for the renamed schema file.
```

   - `title`: Replace the placeholder value, as desired
   - `name`: Replace the placeholder value `todo-catalog` with a unique identifier for your catalog connector type.
   - `uihints.title`: Replace the placeholder value with the value of the `title` property.
   - `uihints.reference_url`: This is the "Learn more" link mentioned earlier. Replace the placeholder as desired.
   - `properties.schemaname.const`: Replace with the new value of `name`.
   - `properties.metadata.properties.description.default`: This is the default value for the catalog instance description. Replace the placeholder as desired. (Empty value is okay.)  
   - `properties.metadata.runtime_type.enum`: This list defines the runtime types that the connector supports. The quickstart connector is configured for Kubeflow Pipelines only. Specify `["KUBEFLOW_PIPELINES"]`, `["APACHE_AIRFLOW"]`, or `["KUBEFLOW_PIPELINES", "APACHE_AIRFLOW]`, as appropriate. 
   - `properties.metadata.runtime_type.default`: The value defines the default selection for `properties.metadata.runtime_type.enum`. (Empty value is okay.)

>    - `properties.metadata.categories.default`: This list defines the categories to which the retrieved components will be assigned by default. The user can override the default selection in the connector's configuration screen.

Reviewer 2: Should we include a default in the schema template? Currently there is not one for `categories`. Alternatively, maybe we could just add phrasing to indicate that a user can add a key/value pair for this default field if desired.

Author: Done! I had an empty default `[]` yesterday, which triggered
```
Validation failed for instance 'hello' using the todo-catalog schema with error: '[]' is not of type 'array'.
```

I've added a value and confirmed that it's working

Reviewer 2: I thought that might have been where that came from 😄

1. Customize the custom catalog connector schema properties. As mentioned earlier, the quickstart connector defines for illustrative purposes a required property (`properties.metadata.todo_required_parm`) and an optional property (`properties.metadata.todo_optional_parm`). 
   - Remove the properties if your connector does not require any user input to fetch the connector list from the catalog or to retrieve components. This typically only applies to connectors with built-in catalogs, such as the [Kubeflow Pipelines example components connector](/component-catalog-connectors/kfp-example-components-connector/kfp_examples_connector/elyra-kfp-catalog.json).
   - Otherwise, customize the properties as desired. (You can add as many properties as necessary) You typically need to do this for connectors that access remote catalogs, such as the [MLX connector](/component-catalog-connectors/mlx-connector/mlx_catalog_connector/mlx-catalog.json).
1. Specify which custom catalog connector schema properties are required. If marked required, the user must provide a non-empty input in the connector configuration.

>    - `properties.metadata.properties.required`: Update this list as appropriate, leaving `"runtime_type"` as is.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be:

```suggestion
   - `properties.metadata.required`: Update this list as appropriate, leaving `"runtime_type"` as is.
```

> 1. Perform a case-insensitive search for `todo` in the file. If one or more matches are still present inthe file verify that you completed all instructions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Perform a case-insensitive search for `todo` in the file. If one or more matches are still present in the file verify that you completed all instructions.
```

install               Install component connector package from PyPI
publish               Upload package to PyPI
source-install        Install component connector package from source 
test-publish          Upload package to test PyPI
```

1. Customize the `Makefile`:
   - Update variable `PACKAGE_NAME` to match the value you've specified in `setup.py`.
   - Set variable `PACKAGE_PATH` to the directory where the connector's source code is stored. The linter is configured to scan the specified directory

1. Build and install the connector package from source.

   ```
   $ make source-install
   ```   

### Test the catalog connector package

Confirm that the connector works as expected.

1. Launch JupyterLab.
1. [Open the `Catalog components` panel](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/pipeline-components.html#managing-custom-components-using-the-jupyterlab-ui).
1. Click `+` and confirm that your connector is displayed in the installed list.
1. Enable the connector by configuring an instance.
1. Test the connector.

Refer to the [_Troubleshooting_](#troubleshooting) section for a list of common issues.

### Update the user documentation

> A connector should include documentation that enables users to install and uninstall the connector and configure the connector in Elyra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A connector should include documentation that informs users how to: install and uninstall the connector, configure the connector, and any other important information you wish to relay to the user.
```

**The catalog connector is not displayed in the new component catalog list.**

  - Message:

    ```
    Error loading schemas for SchemasProvider 'my-catalog-schema' - module 'my_catalog_connector.my_schema_provider' has no attribute 'MySchemasProvider'
    ```
    Action: Verify the `metadata.schemas_providers` entrypoint in `setup.py`. The entrypoint object reference cannot be resolved to an existing Python class. 

  - Message:
 
    ```
    Error loading schemas for SchemasProvider 'todo-catalog-schema' - No module named 'todo_catalog_connector'
    ```
    Action: Verify the `metadata.schemas_providers` entrypoint in `setup.py`. The entrypoint object reference is invalid. 

**No catalog components are displayed in the Visual Pipeline Editor palette.**

The JupyterLab log file should include an error message that explains what happened. If there is no message, make sure the connector implementation class's `get_catalog_entries` method returns results.

  - Message:

    ```
    No entrypoint with name 'my-catalog' was found in group 'elyra.component.catalog_types' to match the 'schema_name' given in catalog 'mytestcatalog'. Skipping...
    ```

>     Action:  Verify that `elyra.component.catalog_types` _entrypoint name_ ("my-catalog" in the example above) in `setup.py` matches the value of the `schema_name` property in the connector's schema file.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just to make this a little clearer:

```suggestion
    Action: Verify that `elyra.component.catalog_types` _entrypoint name_ ("my-catalog" in the example above) in `setup.py` matches the value of the `properties.schema_name.const` property in the connector's schema file.
```
